---
layout: default
order: 5
title:  "Week 5: Regular expressions"
date: "2025-02-11"
categories: main
instructor: 
lesson: https://github.com/pesalerno/computing_SP25/blob/main/_posts/2025-02-11-5_Week_5.md
material-type: 
lesson-type: yes
---

<a href="https://pesalerno.github.io/computing_SP25/main/2025/02/04/4_Week_4.html"><button>Previous Lesson</button></a>    <a href="https://pesalerno.github.io/computing_SP25/main/2025/02/18/6_Week_6.html"><button>Next Lesson</button></a>

# Week 5 | Regular Expressions in `shell`

------------
>>Week's goals:
>
>- editing your bash profile and creating a small bash program
>
>- running `grep` in the shell
>
>
--------------

## Editing your `.bash_profile`

In mac and linux systems, every time you open the shell you automatically run commands within a hidden text file on your home directory called `.bash_profile`. 

First, let's make sure you are in your home directory, or `~`, and try to see if you actually have a file called that, or if you have to create it. Remember, because it's a hidden file, you need to add the argument `-a` to be able to visualize it. 

>--------
>
> If you don't have the file, just create one using `touch`
>
>---

Now, let's visualize and edit the file using `nano` and add the following as the first line: 

```bash
echo "Hi! Bash profile is running"
#or a line of your choice that you would like to see every time you open terminal :) 
```

>------------
>
> Remember that the `.bash_profile` is a text document... so EVERY time you want to add a line to your profile, you need to open, edit, and save this document! 
>
>----------


This will print that line every time you execute a new shell. But how do we activate it? Either by closing and opening terminal/shell again, or by running the follwing line: 

```bash
source .bash_profile
```

In our bash profiles, we can also add aliases. Aliases are shorcuts, so that you don't have to type a whole line of command but instead write a word. So, for example, let's say I have my computing class in the following directory: 

	/Users/patriciasalerno/Documents/SMCM/SP25/computing_class

Now, in the .bash_profile document, I can add the following line: 

```bash
alias computing="cd ~/Users/patriciasalerno/Documents/SMCM/SP25/computing_class" 
#after this, save and close the file and run: 
	
source .bash_profile
#which should make your changes become "sourced" into the shell
```


Now, when you type `computing` in the shell, it should execute that command. Try to add a couple of aliases that you think would be useful to you. A **VERY** useful (and easy) alias to add is to color-code the items in a directory according to whether it's a file, an executable (program), or a directory. Add the following line to your `.bash_profile` document:

```bash
alias ls='ls -G'
	#remember to open it in nano and then save before closing, and do `source` to make the changes be active - this has to be done every time you change your bash profile). 
```

Now, let's [download this small program](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1o4-cCreA6vXvntojwQNgybt1ceuOYm64/view?usp=sharing), called `populations`, which helps export the loci of interest after finishing genotyping calls ([see here](https://catchenlab.life.illinois.edu/stacks/comp/populations.php) for more on what this program does). This program does not need to be **compiled** on your computer - that is, it works as a stand-alone program that does not need to "call" upon other programs or packages to be able to run an analysis. 

Download/save this program into your computing class folder/directory. Now, go **into** the folder where you have `populations` and simply write: 

```bash
populations
	#as we talked about in class last thursday, this does not work as the program was compiled on a MAC rather than on Ubuntu!! See below for adding the path to execute the program we will make... 
```

If the binary file is working on your computer, then it should print out the full manual for options and arguments. Now, if you go to any other directory in your computer, the program will not be called unless you call the full (absolute or relative) path on your computer. Let's say you are in your home directory, so: 


	cd ~

>now, when you type *populations* in terminal outside of the directory that contains it, you will get a message saying that it has no such program or directory. In order to not have to add the full path every time you execute it, such as this: 

	~/Documents/computing-class/populations

> you can add the **ABSOLUTE** path to where the program is located into your `.bash_profile` by adding this line: 

	export PATH=/Users/patriciasalerno/Documents/computing-class:$PATH

> If you did this correctly, you will get the manual output when you type `./populations` from any directory. Once again, don't forget to save and source the changes you made to your bash profile. 
> 

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1o4-cCreA6vXvntojwQNgybt1ceuOYm64/view?usp=drive_link


### Making an executable file in the `shell`

Let's recall the small program (sequences of commands linked through pipe) that we wrote for counting the number of sequences - now we will write a bash program for this task. Before you start, move **into the directory where your sequence files are located**. Now create your file by typing: 

```bash
touch reads-count-script.sh
```

Although the file can be named anything, it's good practice to name a `shell executable program` with `.sh` at the end, simply so that you can keep track of your work. 

Now, open the created file using `nano`, and add the first line of code to our program, which always begins with: 

	#! /bin/bash

This first line is an absolute necessity for making a program, as the **"shebang"** or `#!` is what tells the shell that the contents of the file should be read/executed by bash. 

We can now add our lines of code, and we will be going back to week 2, and re-counting the sequences in the data files within the directory where they are found. So, let's add these lines to our document: 

```bash
for file in ./*.fq
	do
	echo -n $(basename $file .fq)$'\t' 
	cat $file | grep -c '^@.*' 
done
```

>GREAT!! we now have our first bash program :) 
>
>**Before moving on**.... what is this program doing? 
>
>OK, now let's try to run it by typing: 

```bash 
	./reads-count-script.sh
	#uh oh! what happened? 
```	

So the file is a simple file, not an executable. Let's type `ls -l` in the terminal, so that we can see our file - seems like a normal text file. So, let's change the permissions on the file to transform it to an executable:

```bash
	chmod +x reads-count-script.sh
#now the file should be executable, so we can run the line above again:

	./reads-count-script.sh
```	

> Wohoo! (look at the file again using `ls -l` and see what changed)

OK, now let's say we are interested in adding the output directly into a file (not print it onto the screen) so that we can have our table ready for the publication. How would you do this within your script??? 

>> Answer will be posted after thursday lab session 

OK, finally, can you notice how slow it is? is there anything we could modify/eliminate so that our program runs a little faster? 

>> OK, doesn't change too much, but these things matter more as your programs get more complex. 


Now, let's make sure our output file looks good, by doing `cat` followed by the file name. 

>> uh oh! what's going on?? Can we fix this issue within our code?  

>--------------------

>>**REMEMBER, when in doubt, always consult Week 1 page of this course, which has tons of shortcuts and usages for `bash` coding and scripting. 

>------------------------


ANSWER: Below is the code and annotations of how to make the above workflow: 

```bash 
#!/bin/bash

output_file="sequence-reads.txt"
	#create file

> "$output_file"
	#clear file if it already exists


for file in ./*.fq
do 
echo -n $(basename $file .fq)$'\t' >>"$output_file" #save both this line and the next one to the file, remember to append rather than overwrite
grep -c '^@.*' $file >>"$output_file"
done

echo "done"
	#why not add a message of when the analysis is done? :) 
```

Now, let's try to add our program to the PATH in our `.bash_profile` (see above if in doubt!) so that we can execute it from anywhere in the computer. For this, first type `pwd`, then copy/past the full output of that command into a new line on your .bash_profile, then edit that line so that it looks like this: 

```bash 
PATH=$PATH:/full/path/here;export PATH;
	#this hopefully works on linux, I was no able to test it

```

Then, you save the file, and then source it before you run the command: 

```bash
source .bash_profile #source the changes in the .bash_profile
	#then try to execute the program from anywhere on the shell by typing either: 
	./reads-count-script.sh #or:
	reads-count-script.sh
# if it worked, you should've gotten a "logical" error message :) 
```





<a href="https://pesalerno.github.io/computing_SP25/main/2025/02/04/4_Week_4.html"><button>Previous Lesson</button></a>    <a href="https://pesalerno.github.io/computing_SP25/main/2025/02/18/6_Week_6.html"><button>Next Lesson</button></a>

<a href="https://pesalerno.github.io/computing_SP25/"><button>Home</button></a>  